---
title: IRChelp News
status: historical
layout: default
---
# \#IRChelp News

We are the helpers of \#IRChelp on the [IRC](/faq/) networks EFnet
and IRCnet. This page provides news regarding this web site primarily,
so the update frequency will be on the order of once every few months
typically. If you're looking for general, daily IRC news, check out the
links to other news sites immediately below. The following entries are
listed in reverse chronological order. -Jolo,
webmaster and editor.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><strong>Other News Sites</strong>
<ul>
<li><a href="https://web.archive.org/web/20150130025222/http://www.irc-junkie.org/">IRC-Junkie.org</a></li>
<li><a href="http://www.mirc.net/">IRC-Resource.com / mIRC.net</a></li>
</ul></td>
<td><strong>Quick Info Links</strong>
<ul>
<li>Server lists: <a href="../networks/efnet/servers.html">EFnet</a> | 
<a href="../networks/ircnet/serverlist.html">IRCnet</a> | 
<a href="https://www.dal.net/servers/">DALnet</a> | 
<a href="../networks/">others</a></li>
<li>Channel lists: <a href="../chanlist/">EFnet, IRCnet, and multi-networks</a></li>
<li>FAQs: <a href="/faq/">help guides</a></li>
</ul></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>


Jul 28 06

**New mIRC.** OK, so I'm not great at keeping this news section up to
date. We do keep up with important changes, such as the latest version
6.2 of [mIRC](/clients/windows/mirc/) released today.

May 04 04

**New opguide.** Our first major new guide in quite some time, the [New
IRC Channel Operator's Guide](/faq/changuide.html) is a very long and
detailed reference for people really serious about learning how to run a
stable, successful channel.

**Site move.** We've moved our hosting a few times in the past few
months, things are now stable. Our primary site is now provided courtesy
of EFnet.info and our secondary site as before is courtesy of Blackened
Industries. Thanks as usual to our partners who provide resources with
no expectation of any compensation.

Jun 14 03

**Not dead yet\!** Sorry, I've been busy lately, but the site has still
been actively maintained and updated. Let's catch up...

**Networks Site Update.** After many years in the making, we're rolling
out the first phase of our updated [IRC Networks](../networks/) site.
We've consolidated the many different categories from before into just
4: popular, general, subject, and local nets. It is not our intent to be
comprehensive (see next entry for that). Instead, we hope to highlight
some interesting choices for newbies to get started in their exploration
of the hundreds of networks available. And yes, there is a Phase II, but
I've never believed in touting vaporware. Speaking of networks, we also
updated the [DALnet Refugee Guide](/historic/dalrefugee.html) intended
to ease the transition of users leaving DALnet.

**Channel List Update.** We've updated our [channel list](../chanlist/)
page which now points to both of the comprehensive, automatically
updated network/channel list sites at
[netsplit.de](http://irc.netsplit.de/networks/) and the revamped
[searchirc.com](http://www.searchirc.com) (welcome back\!), in addition
to the network-specific searches for EFnet and IRCnet.

**Bot FAQ Update.** This has been a long time coming, but we finally
updated the classic bot FAQ dating back to the early 1990s. You can see
the [new version](../misc/botfaq.html) which links to the original that
will be kept for historical reasons.

**CHANFIX FAQ Update.** The oft-used and abused CHANFIX has its own
[FAQ](/ircd/chanfix/) which was extensively revised by tiggergrm
and myself after much feedback from opers and lusers alike. The intent
is to make it as complete, concise, and clear as possible. 
In addition thanks to falxx we once again have a 
[Norweigian translation](/ircd/chanfix/chanfix-no.html).

**No Services FAQ Update.** We updated [Why EFnet/IRCnet has no
registration services?](../networks/noserv.html) in response to the mass
exodus of users from DALnet as well as other nets. Thanks to holm, this
FAQ is also translated to [Norweigian](../networks/noserv-no.html).

**Security FAQ Updates.** We updated several of our popular
[security](../security/) related files, including [Downloading Files
from IRC](../security/warez.html) (more up to date links on recent
events), [Trojan FAQ](../security/trojan.html) (now simpler and intended
to provide only general information so that it won't get out of date as
quickly), [Firewall FAQ](../security/fwfaq.html) (more specific help
links), etc.

Nov 01 02

**DALnet woes.** As the months of attacks against DALnet continue,
DALnet has now taken the drastic step of intentionally crippling their
round robin server aliases such as irc.dal.net. That's why people are
getting "cannot assign address" errors when trying to connect. We've
updated our [DALnet server list](../networks/servers/dalnet.html) to
include a quick explanation of this problem, as well as a manually
updated server list since DALnet's own [official server
list](http://www.dal.net/servers/) hasn't been updated since April.

**IRChelp.org DNS woes.** Yes, we know that sometimes you can't resolve
(www.)irchelp.org. Our name servers are having technical problems, we're
working on it. We apologize for the continued inconvenience.

Oct 03 02

**Jolopak update... again.** Argh, I screwed up. The hastily put
together ipv6 IP ban in [Jolopak](../script/jolopak.html) 1.4.7 ended up
breaking the ipv4 IPs. It's all fixed now hopefully with 1.4.8. Also,
now /ban and /hban for IPs works the same as with hostnames. See version
notes as usual as bottom of the script itself or that URL.

**IRChelp.org shortcuts**. If you're on IRC you may have seen some of
our convenient URL shortcuts, such as "http://irchelp.org/chanfix" for
the CHANFIX FAQ whose full URL is really
http://www.irchelp.org/ircd/chanfix/. I made a full list of
all these shortcuts, and of course, turned that into a shortcut itself:
[http://irchelp.org/shortcuts](/irchelp/shortcuts.html).

Sep 28 02

**Jolopak update.** The [Jolopak](../script/jolopak.html) 1.4.7 was just
released. This script for the ircII client received a few important
updates recently, including fixing the /ban function to work with new
IPv6 IPs such as "2001:470:1f00:feff::3d1" and fixing the /wall
(/onotice) to work with hybrid-7 and the related "ratbox" ircd's. Note
that I stole the /ban thing from turtle's [robin](../script/robin.html)
channel protection script, so if you're a robin user you can just hack
out the changes for yourself, they should be pretty obvious. See version
notes at bottom of Jolopak for more info.

Sep 12 02

**Mac clients update.** Just made very minor updates to the [Mac client
page](../mac/) for all 3 major choices, plus you gotta love the cute
[Jaguar](http://www.apple.com/macosx/) logo. Did you know that Apple is
now the world's \#1 vendor of \*nix computers? Not sure if that says
something good about Apple or something bad about UNIX. :-)

**IRCd help update.** Also a few weeks ago, we made some minor updates
to various [IRCd](../ircd/) help offerings: 
[CHANFIX help page](/ircd/chanfix/) 
(now also available in a 
[Norweigian translation](/ircd/chanfix/chanfix-no.html) thanks to falxx@EFnet),
the classic [Myths of Opers](../ircd/opermyth.html), and our
[TS0](../ircd/ts0.html) page addressing EFnet zero timestamp problems (believe
		it or not, some channels still have TS 0).

**mIRC 6.03.** For those of you living under a rock, yes, there's a new
[mIRC 6.03](/clients/windows/mirc/). For security reasons, many experts are
recommending that you upgrade to this version. At this point, those of
you still stuck with the single-connection 5.x might as well bite the
bullet and upgrade anyway.

Jul 29 02

**Jolopak update.** My ircII convenience script (OK it's bloatware, I
admit it) was updated twice recently, the first changes in quite some
time. The current [vers 1.4.4](../script/jolopak.html) includes a new
`/refresh` command and fixes to the much-beleaguered `/wall`. I've also
rewritten the description of the script to clarify that it is not just
meant to be used blindly as bloatware, but rather to provide a starting
point to provide convenience while teaching scripting.

**Y.A. news site.** IRC news sites are like big-budget Hollywood movies
- everybody seems to get the same good idea at the same time. Anyway,
the latest news site to emerge is the result of the merging of
[mIRC.net](http://www.mirc.net/) with IRC-Resource.com and
mircscript.org. It's still way too early to judge whether the site will
stand the test of time. Meanwhile, I'm happy to report that
[IRCNews.com](http://www.ircnews.com/) continues to provide frequent,
detailed, and thorough coverage of IRC news. More than just the usual
short blurb (such as the ones you see here), they actually try to
analyze the news and get quotes etc. like a real reporter might.
Although not as detailed, [eyersee.org](http://eyersee.org/) likewise
continues to provide steady coverage.

Jun 24 02

**IRChelp.org DNS problems.** We apologize for the IRChelp.org hostnames
not resolving for the past few days due to an administrative error. The
actual web servers continued to run just fine, but unless you knew an
alternative hostname or the actual IP, you couldn't access them. If this
should ever happen again, always see the topic of EFnet \#IRChelp which
will tell you how to reach our site.

Jun 17 02

**EFnet CHANFIX guide.** The [CHANFIX guide](/ircd/chanfix/) is a
must read for anybody running a channel on EFnet. I just substantiall
rewrote it to be shorter and clearer. CHANFIX is designed to help pepole
who just lost all ops or had their channel taken over by outsiders. Read
the guide now, don't wait until you are in trouble because it may be too
late. In particular, do you have identd and a static hostname, which are
required for you to qualify for CHANFIX assistance? Read the guide to be
sure.

**EFnet FAQ.** A few weeks ago we also received an official update of
Disciple's [EFNet Frequently Asked Questions](../ircd/efnetfaq.html)
which covers issues pertaining to EFnet.

**EFnet oper guide.** Our [ircd page](../ircd/) is also linking to
Riedel's EFnet Oper Guide, which complements aaronb's IRC Operator Guide
(also on our ircd page) by being more up to date and focusing on problem
solving, i.e. "what to do when...".

May 16 02

**Other news sites.** About 9 months ago I started this page as a way to
publicize major IRC related events, such as network outages, server
additions, new client versions, etc. Since then I've discovered two good
news sites that are updated much more frequently, often several items
per day: [IRCNews.com](http://www.ircnews.com/) and
[eyersee.org](http://eyersee.org/). I highly recommend them. There's no
point in duplicating efforts, so from now on I will use this page only
to highlight changes to the many help files on our web site, and to
point out any news that those other sites might have missed.

May 14 02

**QuakeNet replaces EFnet in Top 4.**
[QuakeNet](http://www.quakenet.org/)'s explosive growth made this
inevitable, but it finally happened. Its maximum number of users hit
[94k](http://irc.netsplit.de/networks/QuakeNet/) recently, much higher
than EFnet's [88k](http://irc.netsplit.de/networks/EFnet/) (statistics
links by the brilliant multi-network [IRC statistics
site](http://netsplit.de/networks/)). The average number of users is
still more or less tied at about 86k each, but obviously that too will
change soon enough since QuakeNet seems to be picking up a few thousand
users per month.

**Congressional hearing on dangers kids face on IRC.** A very thorough
article in
[Slashdot](http://slashdot.org/article.pl%3Fsid%3D02/05/14/0630258%26mode%3Dthread%26tid%3D103)
describes the hearing and offers some analysis.

May 10 02

**Attack of the clones\!** How ironic that IRC is in the news regarding
a movie whose title sounds like something out of IRC. Yes, Star Wars
Episode II is now the hottest pirated movie, even if it's just a crappy
camcorder re-recorded version according to a [CNN
article](http://www.cnn.com/2002/TECH/internet/05/10/ca.s02.starwars.copies.ap/).
CNBC's Cory Johnson even called IRC "geek-centric free software, works
kind of like instant messaging." Ouch. It's unfortunate when major news
networks equate IRC with [warez](../security/warez.html).

Apr 02 02

**Minor IRChelp.org updates.** In addition to the major \*nix client
page update mentioned previously below, in the last few weeks we have
also made minor updates to the following: [firewall
FAQ](../security/fwfaq.html) with a new short pointer to [ZoneAlarm
configuration](../security/zonealarm.txt), [channel list
guide](../chanlist/) with slight rewordings and updated numbers for the
multi-network stats site, [user modes](../misc/umodes.html) with DALnet
+R mode, [CHANFIX guide](/ircd/chanfix/) with better explanation
of identd and reverse DNS requirements, URL updates in [IRC
International](../misc/foreign.html), an HTML error fixed in the IRC
Communication Research [Academic
Resources](../communication-research/academic/), and various minor
updates to almost all pages in the [networks section](../networks/). The
much bigger update of the networks section is still progressing, we've
received many new submissions and need to figure out how to present the
most information in a clear yet concise manner.

Mar 19 02

**\*nix clients page update.** We are happy to present a major update of
our [\*nix (UNIX, Linux, BSD, etc.) IRC client page](../ircii/).
Formerly devoted to just ircII, this page now includes descriptions of
other \*nix clients such as the text-based BitchX and EPIC as well as
GUI clients like Xchat and KVIrc.

Mar 6 02

**Back in the saddle again.** After a few weeks where we were relying
some or all of the time on our blackened.com mirror site (thanks Matt),
the primary duke.edu site is now back online. I must say I was pleased
with the relative lack of disruptions, given the serious outages we had.
Basically all our help files and CGI scripts all worked transparently to
the user regardless of whether they used www.irchelp.org or
www2.irchelp.org.

**IRC cartoon.** Subtitled "if life were like IRC" - check out this
[cartoon](http://reallifecomics.com/comics/20020228.gif) from RealLife,
a web-based cartoon.

Feb 24 02

**Channel lists on the web.** I've revamped our web-based [channel
lists](../chanlist/) to emphasize the multi-network IRC statistics site
at netsplit.de, which we've highlighted frequently in previous news
entries. You can now access their search engine indirectly from our site
without having to load their front page which contains a rather large
amount of data unrelated to channel lists. I also split off a separate
[/list troubleshooting guide](../chanlist/trouble.html).

**Return of Efnet.org.** A belated "wb" to
[EFnet.org](http://www.efnet.org) which had been offline for several
weeks due to a "routing problem". As usual there is a lot of
server-related news, including the new `irc.webgiro.se` which is now
carrying a good user load. There are some changes to their URL
hierarchy, for example a new address for the [EFnet server
list](http://www.efnet.org/ircdb/servers.php).

Feb 22 02

**Technical difficulties.** We apologize for problems with both of our
web sites, www.irchelp.org and www2.irchelp.org, over the past week.
It's a long story, but let's just say a lot of different things went
wrong. We had security problems, web server misconfigurations, network
and power outages, etc. At least one of the two fully mirrored web sites
was working for all but a few hours, but I'm sure a lot of people were
inconvenienced anyway. Everything is pretty much normal now. We should
return to 100% capacity within a few days.

Feb 11 02

**mIRC 6 information.** Just added 4 new links to our [mIRC
page](/clients/windows/mirc/index.html#using-mirc-and-scripting) to help explain the new commands and scripting
changes needed for version 6.x.

Feb 10 02

**mIRC 6.01 released.** As we predicted, a bug fix version of mIRC was
released, this time just a week after 6.0. See the [mIRC home page
news](http://www.mirc.com/news.html) for more information. This is
exactly why we advise people to have some patience and not upgrade
blindly. If you rush out to upgrade, you are essentially volunteering as
a public beta tester, which is fine if you don't mind the risks
associated with being on the "bleeding edge", but most typical users
would probably should just wait a few weeks and let the "geeks" work out
the problems. As usual, this site will wait until we are reasonably sure
the new version is stable before serving the new binaries. Until then,
we still recommend version 5.91 for most people.

**New EFnet servers.** After being stable at just below 30 servers for
many months, EFnet has grown over the last month or so to 34 servers.
Some servers you may not have noticed unless you've done a `/links`
lately: `irc.inet.tele.dk, irc.easynews.com, irc.mpls.ca,
irc.flamed.net, irc.secsup.uu.net`. As usual, `/motd` on each server
will tell you its policies. I've updated our [connection troubleshooting
guide](/networks/connectprob.html) which contains more tips on
connecting to EFnet.

**User modes for Big 4 nets**. Ever wonder what those wacky user modes
really do? We've updated our list of [user modes](../misc/umodes.html)
for EFnet, IRCnet, Undernet, and DALnet. If you're an oper, admin or
helper on one of the latter 3 networks and want to contribute an update,
please contact *me*.

Feb 6 02

**mIRC 6.0 related news.** With the multi-server feature in mIRC 6.0,
many existing scripts will need extensive changes to keep working. See
this [scripting guide](http://mirc.stealth.net/multi-FAQ.html) by
blue-elf. Everything seems to be going very smoothly so far, no huge
ugly bugs yet, and in the meantime EFnet \#mIRC has almost doubled in
size to a record 100+ people. Either a lot of people are crossing over
from other networks, or the new mIRC is just that exciting/confusing.
:-)

**EFnet.org still down.** And no, there is still no definite word on
when it will return other than "soon".

Feb 3 02

**mIRC 6.0 released.** In the unlikely event you haven't heard yet, what
with mIRC's usual release hysteria, 6.0 is here, and yes, it supports
multiple servers finally, and also there is no more 16 bit version.
While we are also very excited, we would not be responsible helpers if
we did not remind you that you lose nothing by waiting a week or more to
make sure there are no serious bugs or incompatibilities with existing
scripts. Read the [changes](http://www.mirc.com/news.html) very
carefully first\! As with every major (x.x) version of mIRC in the past,
it is very likely there may be bugs that only surface with widespread
use, or at least odd features requiring updates to your scripts, and
probably a maintenance release (x.x1) version coming in a month or two
anyway. As per our site's longstanding tradition, we will wait a few
days before serving the binary. This is both an attempt to cut back on
the huge (10-fold) increase in short-term bandwidth associated with each
release, but more importantly our way of encouraging people to slow down
and take a breath before just upgrading blindly.

**Firewall FAQ.** We are very excited to present our first new major
help document in a while. Part of our burgeoning
[security](../security/) section, the [firewall
FAQ](../security/fwfaq.html) presents a technical discussion of problems
involved with using IRC from behind a proxy, firewall, or NAT gateway.
Includes links for specific fixes for identd and DCC problems. This
topic has become our most FAQ and we hope you find this guide helpful.
Fellow helpers may benefit from the shorter and easier to remember alias
<http://www.irchelp.org/firewall> (note no slash at the end).

Jan 26 02

**EFnet.org down.** As you may have noticed, their web site has been
down a few days. A reliable source simply told me, "EFnet.org will be
back next week, blame cisco". In other words, they're having technical
difficulties, be patient, these things happen. After all, web sites like
that and ours as well are all run by volunteers using donated resources.
When things break, it takes time to fix, potentially days or more.

Virus hoax. We're seeing yet another old scam revived. The lamer uses a
bogus virus warning to trick you into downloading the actual virus.
Here's a typical message: "You just tried to send me
\["LIFE\_STAGES.TXT.SHS"\] Which means your\[sic\] infected with "Life
Stages" Virus. If you don«t remove this Virus within the next 30 minutes
I will notify the IRCOPS of Efnet, which will ban you from the network.
To fix the problem get EfnetCleaner at \[some web site\]". If you go to
the web page, you will download the trojan horse setup.exe, and if you
run that later on, that is when you actually get infected with a real
virus. To avoid getting these annoying messages, make sure you are
"invisible" (user mode +i, in mIRC it's an option at the bottom of the
connection setup dialog, alt-o | connect) and avoid the usual spam-prone
channels for [warez](../security/warez.html).

Jan 19 02

**irc.east.gblx.net down for 2 weeks.** For the 7000 or so people who
make this the 3rd busiest server on EFnet, note the announcements on
[EFnet.org news](http://www.efnet.org/) for the approximately 2 week
downtime from Jan 22 to Feb 6. If you need help finding another server
to use, see our [connection troubleshooting
guide](/networks/connectprob.html) (which I just updated).

**Leaning on Homelien.** According to the [EFnet server
list](http://www.efnet.org/ircdb/servers.php), everybody is piling on to
a few servers. The top 4 servers carry over 40% of the users, and those
4 servers by themselves would still keep EFnet in the "Big Four"
networks along with IRCnet, DALnet, and Undernet. EFnet has always been
odd in having relatively few servers compared to other large networks,
but this is getting silly. In particular, over 10,000 users (1 out of
every 7) sit on irc.homelien.no alone. That's great until that server
splits or dies, which can leave your channel really messed up if many or
all of your ops were on that server or downstream from that server. The
moral of this story? Choose a variety of servers you can connect to, and
if you're running a channel, spread your ops out as much as possible.

**Snak 4.8.2 released.** The Mac IRC client
[Snak](http://www.snak.com/Snak.html) was updated to 4.8.2 on Jan 12.
See [version history](http://www.snak.com/SnakHistory.html) for full
details of changes. I took the opportunity to make slight updates to all
entries on our [Mac IRC client](../mac/) page.

Jan 08 02

**More JUPES/CHANFIX news.** First, you probably noticed the
pseudo-chanserv [JUPES](/ircd/chanfix/) on EFnet is now renamed to
CHANFIX. (I think the nick JUPES is just being juped, ironically, but I
don't think it does anything any more.) As of Dec 18, all EFnet global
IRC operators (opers) now have access to its "score" command. This
feature, previously accessible only by IRC admins, now allows any global
oper to investigate an alleged takeover by checking to see if the people
currently holding ops are the ones who have been holding ops for a long
time, or if they just came into power very recently. The oper then
presumably may talk to his admins to request a "chanfix" to reverse the
takeover. This makes sense, since in the past lusers had to go talk to
admins directly, and the vast majority of takeover claims are spurious.
It's nice to allow lusers to have access to more people who might be
able to help, and for opers to sort out the ones deserving of such help
before bothering the admins. For more info, see Disciple's
[post](http://www.efnet.org/forum/cgi-bin/YaBB.pl?board=general&action=display&num=1008701122)
on EFnet.org. If all this talk of admins and opers makes your head spin,
just ask \#IRChelp if your channel was recently taken over, we'll try to
help you.

Jan 04 02

**Happy 2002\!** Hope you're recovering from your hangover. I'm happy to
report that IRChelp.org is now entering its 11th year of helping people.
We are proud to say that we have been doing this purely with a small
group of volunteers and donated computers and bandwidth. We maintain 2
mirrored web sites that serve over 30,000 hits a day without any
corporate sponsors, banner ads, etc. We've long since lost count of how
many people we've helped, but it's in the tens of millions.

**//$decode trojan keeps going and going...** We first reported on the
annoying `//$decode` trojan way back on Aug 30 (below). Basically, the
victim is tricked into typing a command beginning with `//$decode`, and
ends up handing control of his mIRC over to somebody else. Regretably,
months later, people are still falling for this stupid trick. EFnet
\#mIRC set up a [decoder page](http://slacker.to/decode.cgi) which lets
you paste in the suspicious command to see what it does, and if you were
unfortunate enough to have typed it already, what you should do to fix
the problem. Alternatively, visit EFnet \#dmsetup which is kind enough
to specialize in helping people with these problems, or see our [trojan
horse help page](../security/trojan.html).

**Windows Universal Plug and Play exploit.** Check out this latest
security problem which could let somebody else run any program they want
on your computer. [Microsoft's help
page](http://www.microsoft.com/technet/security/bulletin/ms01-059.asp)
says: "Microsoft strongly urges all Windows XP customers to apply the
patch immediately. Customers using Windows 98, 98SE or ME should apply
the patch if Universal Plug and Play support is installed and running."

Dec 16 01

**Win XP firewall breaks identd/DCC.** Suddenly having trouble with your
[identd](/networks/connectprob.html#43-no-identd) (unable to connect to
EFnet/DALnet servers) or can't DCC send any more? If you just upgraded
to Windows XP, it's most likely the built-in Internet Connection
Firewall (ICF). Bring up Properties for your connection (dialup, cable,
DSL, etc), click "Advanced" tab, uncheck the box to disable it, and
reboot. If you want to configure ICF to stay on but allow identd and
DCC, you will need to figure out how to accept incoming TCP/IP
connections on port 113 for identd, and at least some ports in the
1024-5000 range for mIRC's DCC (and constrain mIRC to use the same port
range you select such as 4000-4010 in DCC options). Check your
documentation or seek help from Win XP experts for how to do that.

Dec 09 01

**Farewell Colorado.** The venerable irc.colorado.edu EFnet server is
retiring. Their MOTD is quoted in its entirety: "An IRC server has been
running at the University of Colorado at Boulder since 1988 and that
makes it officially the oldest continuously operating IRC server on the
Internet. It's been a good long run. Well the sad day has finally come.
irc.colorado.edu will be going away by Jan 1, 2002 Let me repeat that.
irc.colorado.edu will be switched off for good, by the end of this
calender year. The university can no longer afford to support the
hardware and software to run it, nor the network resources to support
not only the traffic to and from the server, but the extra bandwidth
needed to handle the various DoS attempts made against the server. They
can no longer accept the liability of running an IRC server and the
decision had been made to retire it for good. It's been good serving the
IRC community for the last 12 years." Thanks for the memories.

**Other EFnet server tidbits.** In addition,
[EFnet.org](http://www.efnet.org/) news reportes on various other server
hijinks over the past week. irc.plur.net retired but came back almost
immediately, irc.efnet.pl and irc.east.gblx.net both returned after an
extended hiatus, irc.webgiro.se began its trial link with wide open
i-line policies, and irc.secsup.uu.net and irc.corbe.net both just
received approval for a trial link and should be up and running soon.
Thanks as usual to Hardy for keeping us all in the loop.

**Million mIRC March.** No, it's not a huge rally in DC. According to
the [mIRC home page](http://www.mirc.com), the opt-in mailing list
announcing new mIRC releases just topped 1,000,000 subscribers. Sure,
some of those are perhaps dead hotmail accounts that never existed, but
then again probably only a fraction of mIRC users would bother to
subscribe to the list. This all supports my estimate from Oct 18 (see
below) that there are probably several million IRC users. There's a cute
plot of the growth rate of the mailing list which seems to show a very
linear trend doubling every year or so. So much for the demise of the
IRC protocol in the face of instant messenging.

**IRCnet updates.** Quoting an entry dated Nov 27 from the new
semi-official [IRCnet site](http://www.ircnet.com), "irc.telia.lv left
IRCNet due heavy DoS atacks, this is the third Latvian server that left
IRCNet, no comeback is promised. All Latvian users may use irc.estpak.ee
instead."

**IRCnet server map.** Check out the [IRCnet server
map](http://pasky.ji.cz/~pasky/irc/IRCnet.html) in ASCII text (similar
to ircII /map style, more readable but not sexy) or a GraphViz version
(\~300 kB image, sexy but not easy to read). The
[script](http://pasky.ji.cz/~pasky/irc/) for generating these maps is
available open source courtesy of Peter Baudis. I've added a link to
this site from our own [IRCnet server
list](../networks/ircnet/serverlist.html) page.

**Networks pages updates.** I just updated our pages for the 
[Popular networks](../networks/popular.html) and various entries in
[regional](../networks/regional.html) and 
[small](../networks/small.html) networks. We're in the process of a
big revamp of that whole networks section to streamline and clean up
everything, stay tuned.

Dec 04 01

**IRCnet home page.** Well it still isn't official, and it's pretty
rough around the edges, but [www.ircnet.com](http://www.ircnet.com/)
seeks to provide IRCnet information like server lists, connection FAQs,
etc. EFnet and IRCnet, being born out of the original chaos of IRC,
probably will never have official home pages, but at least some EFnet
admins finally got together to make
[www.efnet.org](http://www.efnet.org/) a pretty good source of
information. Let's hope for the same with IRCnet.

**Jupes FAQ update.** The [jupes
FAQ](http://www.demolished.org/qurve/efnet/jupes-faq.txt) has been
updated by qurve to reflect the changes pertaining to chanfix which we
reported on Nov 5. I went ahead and updated our more general [chanfix
FAQ](/ircd/chanfix/) to go along with it.

**Trojans everywhere.** First Nimda, then Badtrans, then Goner. No,
they're not the names of Santa's reindeer. It's the latest crop of
[trojan horse viruses](../security/trojan.html). In the case of Goner,
if you look past all the shrill cries of "fastest spreading virus\!\!\!"
on the news, you'll see the truth - that this is really not much
different than the usual Love Bug-type Visual Basic program distributed
by email. You don't even need a firewall or anti-virus software to stop
it - just don't open unexpected attachments that anybody sends you in
email, even (or especially) if it's from friends and family. The real
story here is, how come people just can't learn this very simple lesson
and keep falling for the same dumb trick over and over? Sigh. For more
info see this [Symantec info
page](http://securityresponse.symantec.com/avcenter/venc/data/w32.goner.a@mm.html).
Goner was associated with IRC in some newscasts because if you have mIRC
installed, it will put in a backdoor script so that your computer and
network may potentially be used as a "zombie" in a distributed [DoS
attack](../nuke/). For more info on the other viruses, check your
favorite anti-virus software vendor's web site.

Nov 29 01

**Bogus fserve //write trojan.** There's a trojan going around
masquerading as a fileserver trigger ad that looks like `"[Fserve]
Trigger:[//.write $decode([gibberish of characters follow]"`. This is a
minor variation on the usual `"type this! //[some command]"` idea, where
`"//"` evaluates expressions which are disguised using `$decode, $left`,
etc. In fact we already described a similar ruse involving `$decode`
below on Aug 30. The basic idea is to get you to type mIRC commands that
makes you do something foolish or give somebody else control over your
mIRC client. In this latest case, it creates a script file and then runs
it. As always, never ever type some command that you don't understand,
especially if it involves `"//"` and weird convoluted character strings.
When in doubt, ask first\!

Nov 25 01

**TalkCity: IRC for pay.** Following our first report back on Oct 10,
the [TalkCity](http://www.talkcity.com/) network has now completed its
transition towards a partially for-pay
["ChatSafe"](http://www.talkcity.com/chatsafe/) system. Under this new
system, a minority of channels are actively moderated or monitored
("hosted rooms") or just passively policed ("featured rooms") for
violations of their abuse policy. Only members who pay $1/month may
access these safe channels. Abusers lose their money and their
membership. A new twist is that ChatSafe members may once again use any
standard IRC client. You can still chat on the majority of their
channels which remain unmonitored, but you must still use those special
IRC clients which have been modified for TalkCity to curb abuse and spam
ads.

**Graphical stats by MRTG.** Another interesting statistics site, [IRC
Networks MRTG](http://rldf.eu.org/irc/mrtg/) by RLDF on IRCnet and
Kewl.Org tracks the traditional "Big Four" nets (EFnet, IRCnet,
Undernet, DALnet) using the [Multi Router Traffic
Grapher](http://people.ee.ethz.ch/%7Eoetiker/webtools/mrtg/mrtg.html)
(MRTG) network load monitoring package, which allows you to track stats
graphically as they vary over time. Compared to the [IRC statistics
site](http://netsplit.de/networks/) which we featured previously, RLDF's
site shows the diurnal cycle of nets like Undernet and DALnet very
clearly. There is also a server-by-server user breakdown which is unique
but mostly just fun for stats geeks. :-)

**mIRC server list update.** The mIRC
[servers.ini](http://www.mirc.co.uk/servers.ini) file was updated on Nov
16. Save the file to your mIRC directory (such as c:\\mirc\\).

Nov 05 01

**Yet more changes to EFnet JUPES.** As if JUPES wasn't confusing enough
already (see our [guide](/ircd/chanfix/) which in turn points to
several others), more changes are apparently on the way based on a
recently passed
[vote](https://voting.blackened.com/pastvotes/0022.shtml) of EFnet
admins. These proposed changes tighten up the way its chanfix (formerly
known as "reverse") feature work to counter the effects of a takeover.

**Improved EFnet server list.** The [EFnet.org server
list](http://www.efnet.org/ircdb/servers.php) has been improved to show
more information in a more streamlined fashion. You can now see the
percentage user load and max users for each server. An extended view
even shows version and admin contact info, which is very useful for the
majority of us non-opers who often can't do /version or /admin commands
remotely (i.e., without first connecting to the server).

**mIRC registrations raise over $27k for charity.** According to the
[mIRC home page](http://www.mirc.com/), 1368 people registered mIRC
during October, raising a total of US$Ê27,360 which will be donated to
the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies to
help with refugee issues in and around Afghanistan. Hurrah for
[shareware](../misc/shareware.html)\!

Oct 29 01

**Warez warez everywhere...** Ever wonder which are the biggest
channels? According to the [channel list
feature](http://netsplit.de/networks/chanlist.shtml) of netsplit.de, 7
of the top 10 channels have to do with [warez](../security/warez.html)
(and 4 of those 7 are on EFnet). I'll let you draw your own conclusions.
Anybody remember the good ol' days when IRC was all about netsex? :-)

**Chatnet woes.** Last week [Chatnet](http://www.chatnet.org/) became
the latest network to suffer from crippling denial of service attacks.
The attacks took out their channel service "K9" as well as the Portland
server. Quoting its web site: "On Monday, October 22, 2001, ChatNet's
IRCD was updated to use the Bahamut 1.4.29 IRCD. K9 is being updated to
provide more functionality for our channel services." For now everybody
is getting used to the new ircd, and K9 remains offline while its
replacement is being tested for release hopefully this week. You may
direct your questions to the good folks on \#chatnet.

**One last register-mIRC-for-charity spam.** The details have been
mentioned in previous entries (see below), so this is just a quick
update. Quoting the [mIRC home page](http://www.mirc.com/): "Since
October 1st, 1221 mIRC users have registered their copies of mIRC to
support this appeal, we've raised around US$24,420.00 so far\! Note that
mIRC can be registered for a lower amount than usual this month in
support of this appeal. You can get your mIRC registered and support a
good cause at the same time\!" There are just a few days left, and $10
will do the trick. Gives a whole new meaning to
[shareware](../misc/shareware.html), doesn't it?

Oct 18 01

**Multi-network statistics.** This [IRC statistics
site](http://netsplit.de/networks/) is an impressively thorough new
service provided by Andreas Gelhausen of
[netsplit.de](http://netsplit.de/networks/about.shtml). Like the late
Liszt.com (which died about last year) and SearchIRC.com (which died
about last month), this site automatically connects to a large number of
networks and provides /lusers stats and channel /list data. Unlike its
predecessors, the netsplit.de site doesn't seem to be out to get page
hits and is so far free of banner ads. Instead, Andreas's purpose seems
to be to show off how to get stats and display them in very cool plots.
Also, he has figured out how to let networks opt in and specify their
own connect information, which makes the process much more robust.
Interestingly, my estimates a few days ago of how many users are on IRC
turned out to be pretty close. According to this site, at any given
moment there are about 700k users on 300k channels on 3000 servers
belonging to over 300 networks. Assuming a several-fold turnover rate,
there are probably a few million of us out there\!

**IRCnet breaks 100k lusers.** Speaking of stats,
[IRCnet](../networks/ircnet/serverlist.html) recently set a new record by
breaking 100k lusers (see the [netsplit.de IRCnet
stats](http://netsplit.de/networks/IRCnet/)). The luser count cycles up
and down between 56k and 101k, which is a lot more variation than most
other nets, maybe that means it's actually composed mostly of real
people and not just bots? Heh. In any case, congratulations, that's an
impressive technical and social achievement.

**Trillian - the "ultimate chat program".** [Cerulean
Studios](http://www.ceruleanstudios.com/), the makers of this new client
make that claim because it's the first that allows you to chat in AOL
IM, ICQ, MSN Messenger, IRC, and Yahoo\! Messenger, all at the same time
in one relatively small program. You can
[compare](http://www.ceruleanstudios.com/compare.html) it against mIRC
and other clients. It's pretty new and may or may not stand the test of
time. The latest version 0.6351 was released a few months ago, but hey,
it's still news to most people. Oh, and for true IRC geeks, no, it has
nothing to do with our fellow helper/op Trillian, one of IRC's wise old
dinosaurs. 
{% comment %}
(Her picture and that of many other helpers may be found in
our [digital photo album](../helpgifs/).)
{% endcomment %}

Oct 14 01

**How popular is mIRC?** Most people recognize that mIRC is far and away
the most popular IRC client, with estimates ranging from 50-90% market
share. Hard numbers are not easy to come by, but here are some hints.

1.  For the recent register-for-charity drive (see Oct 10 entry below),
    the [mIRC home page](http://www.mirc.com/) revealed that almost 500
    people registered in the first 2 weeks of October so far. Even if we
    assume that the normal pace is only 1/2 or 1/3 of that, we're still
    talking about thousands of registrations per year. If we further
    assume that most users are cheapskates and only a few percent bother
    to register [shareware](../misc/shareware.html), then we're talking
    about hundreds of thousands of new users each year.
2.  Consider the download numbers. Our site isn't even an official one,
    yet our *download stats* show a few thousand
    downloads every week, many times more than that after new version
    releases. There are dozens of [official download
    sites](http://www.mirc.com/get.html), and AFAIK each handles
    thousands of downloads a day. Add it all up, and you have many
    millions of downloads a year. Even if only 1 out of 10 downloaders
    end up keeping mIRC, and even assuming half are just upgrades, again
    you have hundreds of thousands of new users a year.
3.  Finally, consider that there are about 10 [networks](../networks/)
    with tens of thousands of users at any moment, drawn from several
    times that number who frequent the networks regularly, which comes
    to millions of IRC users in all. If we just assume half of them use
    mIRC, that's still millions, of which about 1/10 have perhaps just
    started in the past year - again, hundreds of thousands of new users
    per year.

Three ways to count, three similar answers. Note that I pass no
judgement on which client is "best" - such silly arguments are best left
to [geeks](http://foldoc.doc.ic.ac.uk/foldoc/foldoc.cgi?geek) who get
all riled up about OS wars.

Oct 10 01

**Register mIRC for charity.** According to the [mIRC home
page](http://www.mirc.com/), all registrations in October will be
donated to the [International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent
Societies,](http://www.ifrc.org/) benefiting the Afghan refugee aid
effort. If you haven't registered yet, this is as good a reason as any
to do it. In case you didn't know, like most other IRC clients, mIRC is
[shareware](../misc/shareware.html).

**Snak 4.7.2 for Mac released.** Continuing in its 4th year of active
development, [Snak](http://www.snak.com/) 4.7.2 was just released. See
the [Mac OS IRC client](../mac/) page for a description of this and
other competing clients.

**Talk City charges for chat.** This is not a surprise, as it is a
natural evolution of where [Talkcity](http://www.talkcity.com/) (TC) has
been going lately. While purists would not even consider TC an IRC
network any more, since they require the use of non-standard IRC clients
(purportedly to curb abuse, but oh btw it spams ads too), I think this
development is still interesting since it may foreshadow the evolution
of mainstream IRC too. Anyway, check out this
[email](../misc/talkcity.html) from TC's CEO outlining a series of
planned measures to improve security and accountability. The biggest
changes includes "hosted" channels similar to AOL, which will become
"secured" channels. I quote: "Members who wish to enter chat rooms in
these secured areas will be asked to provide verifiable information
about themselves, and to do so as a part of subscribing for an annual
membership and to pay a nominal fee of $1.00 (One Dollar) per month. It
is the information we collect via the payment process that provides the
level of personal accountability and authenticity." The email emphasizes
that the vast majority of TC channels will continue to be free and
unmonitored as they are now.

Oct 6 01

**EFnet.org news returns.** The semi-official news source for EFnet is
now back at [EFnet.org](http://www.efnet.org/index.php).

**Server reboots**. Speaking of news, see that site for an explanation
of the network-wide server reboots going on this weekend, in order to
install a new version of [TS](https://voting.blackened.com/docs/ts5.txt)
(the timestamp system designed to prevent intentional nick collisions
and "riding splits" for channel ops).

**Connection guide update**. Just updated our [connection
troubleshooting guide](/networks/connectprob.html) with current server
lists for people from various ISPs, or who don't have identd or reverse
DNS. These updates occur at least once a month, or when major changes
occur.

Aug 30 01

**mIRC $decode() exploit**. File this under the Darwinism of IRC
category. Lamers are trying to get people to copy and paste something
like `//$decode([jibberish here])` or `// $+ $decode([jibberish])`. In
mIRC, $encode and $decode will convert text to apparent jibberish and
back using "uuencode" (see geeky [FOLDOC
definition](http://foldoc.doc.ic.ac.uk/foldoc/foldoc.cgi?query=uuencode)).
So basically if you copy and paste that //$decode() line, you just typed
a series of commands, which can do all the usual damage of any [trojan
horse](../security/trojan.html). Like the similar //$left() and
//$right() tricks, this is not a mIRC bug, but rather an exploit against
the gullibility of newbies who blindly type commands from others. If
you're curious, use `//echo -a $decode(whatever)` to see what the secret
commands are - just be really careful you have the //echo -a up front\!

**Yet another JUPES FAQ - "reverse"**. We just updated our [EFnet
op-less channel fixing FAQ](/ircd/chanfix/) to reflect the new
"reverse" feature of the EFnet channel fixing service "JUPES", which
will let an IRC operator reverse the effects of a recent takeover. It
points to a new, plain English guide to JUPES which covers this reverse
feature nicely: "[What ChanFix/JUPES really is and
isn't](http://www.demolished.org/qurve/efnet/jupes-faq.txt)".

Aug 28 01

**New servers.** If you did /links recently, you may have noticed EFnet
is now up to 36 servers (see EFnet.org [server
list](http://www.efnet.org/index.php?p=servers)), the latest being
irc.snoogans.org. As always, use /motd to read each server's message of
the day (i.e. rules and announcements).

**New trojans - on join spammer and random username.** Two relatively
harmless but popular trojan horse viruses appear to be making the rounds
on EFnet at least. The first one causes you to spam people who join your
channels with a welcome and a URL that has a Java/ActiveX web browser
exploit. (Most people should probably turn off both in their browsers
anyway.) The second one randomly changes your username (the part just
before the @ in your /whois information, often mistakenly called your
"ident" or "identd"). They may or may not be covered even in the latest
anti-virus programs. Seek help from EFnet \#dmsetup or the other usual
suspects. For general info such as how you may have gotten infected in
the first place, see our [trojan horse help
page](../security/trojan.html).

**EFnet.org redesign in progress.** [EFnet.org](http://www.efnet.org)
unveiled its new look recently, some links still await filling out. Note
that some URLs have changed, including the [server
list](http://www.efnet.org/index.php?p=servers).

Aug 19 01

**Return of efnet.org?** EFnet's unofficial home page at
[EFnet.org](http://www.efnet.org/) is back. The news section remains
blank, but the [server list](http://www.efnet.org/index.php?p=servers)
is alive at least. The rest should follow soon.

**Bulletin boards back in vogue.** Remember those web-based bulletin
boards that predated IRC? Ironically, they are now a new source of IRC
help and discussion. You sometimes need to wade through flames and "me
too" spam, but the patient reader can often find expert help or
intelligent IRC-related discussion at the [mIRC home page message
boards](http://trout.snt.utwente.nl:82/wwwthreads.pl) (very decent
search feature) and [EFnet forum](http://www.efnet.org/forum/).

Aug 16 01

**Connection guide update.** We've updated our [connection
troubleshooting guide](../networks/connectprob.html) with current server
lists for people from various ISPs, or who don't have identd or reverse
DNS.

Aug 6 01

**Hello world.** This page was launched after the demise of
www.EFnet.org, which used to provide some nice resources for EFnet
including a server list and the latest news in a clear, concise fashion.
We hope to provide the same service at least until they or somebody else
semi-official resumes that task. In addition, we will also provide other
news helpful to general users such as information on the latest [trojan
horse attacks](../security/trojan.html), our web site updates, etc.

**EFnet.org is down.** No, it's not due to [denial of service
attacks](../nuke/) from "[hackers](../security/trojanterms.html)". There
are just administrative issues which they need to resolve. There is no
definitive date for that web site to return, but apparently it won't be
too soon. EFnet.org was the latest in a series of semi-official sites
for EFnet, providing the kinds of services you'd expect from a network
home page, namely server lists, news, etc. As a humorous side note,
their predecessor [EFnet.net](http://www.efnet.org/) has now become an
amusing spoof of an EFnet home page.

**JUPES channel service.** You may have noticed the new EFnet
pseudo-service called "JUPES" which can reop an opless channel. Please
see our detailed [chanfix FAQ](/ircd/chanfix/) for more info.

