---
title: Server Numerics Headers
author: irchelp.org staff
layout: default
---

# Server Numerics Headers

This file is purely informative, intended to replace the well-known server-
numerics file (which I think has long outlived its usefulness due to
[ircd](../ircd/) changes and the varying numerics for different ircds) for
client authors, script writers and other technically oriented users. It's also
a monument to the inability of ircd coders on different networks to agree on
standards. Whether that's due to negligence, lack of communication, plain pig-
headedness or a conspiracy to confuse people is not a question I can answer,
however it's a major pain for client coders and scripters trying to make their
code work with more than one ircd. In compiling this list, I found out that
EFnet and Undernet ircd coders are much more conscientious about coordinating
(with a few exceptions) their numerics with others, while IRCnet and DALnet
ircd coders apparently couldn't care less. This file is NOT intended to
replace the authoritative numerics header for any ircd.

The list would probably be twice as long if it included all the little hacks
in modified versions of these ircds which are in use on smaller networks and
the depraved atrocities of non-standard ircds like Qdeck's and IRCX
extensions. I doubt the situation will get any better in the future as long as
ircd coders continue to trample on the RFC like a herd of elephants (hey, now
they have five RFCs to stomp on, woohoo) and disregard the need for cross-
network standards. No, really, why are there three different numerics for
RPL_STATSDLINE and why is 005 used for three different replies?

All information was extracted from the numerics headers of the current ircd
version (10/2000) of the four [major networks](../networks/popular.html). I
might have missed something, somewhere but it's about as complete as it could
be. It does not include numerics added by various server patches (another
long, sad story) in use with any of these ircds (mainly IRCnet's) and I won't
even attempt to touch the questionable use of NOTICE in place of numeric
replies or even duplicating them. Deprecated and redundant RFC1459 numerics
are included.

Comments, suggestions and constructive criticism: You can find me on IRC.
Flames, gripes and bitching: redirect to /dev/null.

* * *

Ircd server numerics v1.1, 22 Oct 2000

By Alex Charalabidis (Apatrix)

* * *


    E=EFnet hybrid-6rc4
    I=IRCnet 2.10.3
    i=IRCnet, reserved according to Undernet (sic) numerics headers
    U=Undernet u2.10.07
    D=DALnet bahamut 1.4.8


    001	IEUD	RPL_WELCOME
    002	IEUD	RPL_YOURHOST
    003	IEUD	RPL_CREATED
    004	IEUD	RPL_MYINFO
    005	I	RPL_BOUNCE
    005	U	RPL_MAP
    005	D	RPL_PROTOCTL
    006	U	RPL_MAPMORE
    007	U	RPL_MAPEND
    008	U	RPL_SNOMASK
    009	U	RPL_STATMEMTOT
    010	U	RPL_STATMEM
    014	i	RPL_YOURCOOKIE
    200	IEUD	RPL_TRACELINK
    201	IEUD	RPL_TRACECONNECTING
    202	IEUD	RPL_TRACEHANDSHAKE
    203	IEUD	RPL_TRACEUNKNOWN
    204	IEUD	RPL_TRACEOPERATOR
    205	IEUD	RPL_TRACEUSER
    206	IEUD	RPL_TRACESERVER
    207	IEU	RPL_TRACESERVICE
    208	IEUD	RPL_TRACENEWTYPE
    209	IEUD	RPL_TRACECLASS
    210	I	RPL_TRACERECONNECT
    211	IEUD	RPL_STATSLINKINFO
    212	IEUD	RPL_STATSCOMMANDS
    213	IEUD	RPL_STATSCLINE
    214	IEUD	RPL_STATSNLINE
    215	IEUD	RPL_STATSILINE
    216	IEUD	RPL_STATSKLINE
    217	IED	RPL_STATSQLINE
    217	U	RPL_STATSPLINE
    218	IEUD	RPL_STATSYLINE
    219	IEUD	RPL_ENDOFSTATS
    220	E	RPL_STATSPLINE
    221	IEUD	RPL_UMODEIS
    222	ED	RPL_STATSBLINE
    223	ED	RPL_STATSELINE
    224	ED	RPL_STATSFLINE
    225	E	RPL_STATSDLINE
    225	D	RPL_STATSZLINE
    226	D	RPL_STATSCOUNT
    227	D	RPL_STATSGLINE
    231	IU	RPL_SERVICEINFO
    232	IU	RPL_ENDOFSERVICES
    233	IU	RPL_SERVICE
    234	IEUD	RPL_SERVLIST
    235	IEUD	RPL_SERVLISTEND
    239	I	RPL_STATSIAUTH
    240	I	RPL_STATSVLINE
    241	IEUD	RPL_STATSLLINE
    242	IEUD	RPL_STATSUPTIME
    243	IEUD	RPL_STATSOLINE
    244	IEUD	RPL_STATSHLINE
    245	IEuD	RPL_STATSSLINE
    246	I	RPL_STATSPING
    246	U	RPL_STATSTLINE
    246	D	RPL_STATSULINE
    247	I	RPL_STATSBLINE
    247	U	RPL_STATSGLINE
    247	E	RPL_STATSXLINE
    248	I	RPL_STATSDEFINE
    248	EU	RPL_STATSULINE
    249	IEUD	RPL_STATSDEBUG
    250	I	RPL_STATSDLINE
    250	EUD	RPL_STATSCONN
    251	IEUD	RPL_LUSERCLIENT
    252	IEUD	RPL_LUSEROP
    253	IEUD	RPL_LUSERUNKNOWN
    254	IEUD	RPL_LUSERCHANNELS
    255	IEUD	RPL_LUSERME
    256	IEUD	RPL_ADMINME
    257	IEUD	RPL_ADMINLOC1
    258	IEUD	RPL_ADMINLOC2
    259	IEUD	RPL_ADMINEMAIL
    261	IEUD	RPL_TRACELOG
    262	I	RPL_TRACEEND
    262	ED	RPL_ENDOFTRACE
    262	U	RPL_TRACEPING
    263	I	RPL_TRYAGAIN
    263	ED	RPL_LOAD2HI
    265	ED	RPL_LOCALUSERS
    266	ED	RPL_GLOBALUSERS
    271	UD	RPL_SILELIST
    272	UD	RPL_ENDOFSILELIST
    274	i	RPL_STATSDELTA
    275	UD	RPL_STATSDLINE
    280	U	RPL_GLIST
    281	U	RPL_ENDOFGLIST
    290	D	RPL_HELPHDR
    291	D	RPL_HELPOP
    292	D	RPL_HELPTLR
    293	D	RPL_HELPHLP
    294	D	RPL_HELPFWD
    295	D	RPL_HELPIGN
    300	IEUD	RPL_NONE
    301	IEUD	RPL_AWAY
    302	IEUD	RPL_USERHOST
    303	IEUD	RPL_ISON
    304	IEUD	RPL_TEXT
    305	IEUD	RPL_UNAWAY
    306	IEUD	RPL_NOWAWAY
    307	U	RPL_USERIP
    307	D	RPL_WHOISREGNICK
    308	D	RPL_WHOISADMIN
    309	D	RPL_WHOISSADMIN
    310	D	RPL_WHOISSVCMSG
    311	IEUD	RPL_WHOISUSER
    312	IEUD	RPL_WHOISSERVER
    313	IEUD	RPL_WHOISOPERATOR
    314	IEUD	RPL_WHOWASUSER
    315	IEUD	RPL_ENDOFWHO
    316	IED	RPL_WHOISCHANOP
    317	IEUD	RPL_WHOISIDLE
    318	IEUD	RPL_ENDOFWHOIS
    319	IEUD	RPL_WHOISCHANNELS
    321	IEUD	RPL_LISTSTART
    322	IEUD	RPL_LIST
    323	IEUD	RPL_LISTEND
    324	IEUD	RPL_CHANNELMODEIS
    325	I	RPL_UNIQOPIS
    326	i	RPL_NOCHANPASS
    327	i	RPL_CHPASSUNKNOWN
    329	EUD	RPL_CREATIONTIME
    331	IEUD	RPL_NOTOPIC
    332	IEUD	RPL_TOPIC
    333	EUD	RPL_TOPICWHOTIME
    334	U	RPL_LISTUSAGE
    334	D	RPL_COMMANDSYNTAX
    338	i	RPL_CHANPASSOK
    339	i	RPL_BADCHANPASS
    341	IEUD	RPL_INVITING
    342	IED	RPL_SUMMONING
    346	I	RPL_INVITELIST
    347	I	RPL_ENDOFINVITELIST
    348	IE	RPL_EXCEPTLIST
    349	IE	RPL_ENDOFEXCEPTLIST
    351	IEUD	RPL_VERSION
    352	IEUD	RPL_WHOREPLY
    353	IEUD	RPL_NAMREPLY
    354	U	RPL_WHOSPCRPL
    361	IEUD	RPL_KILLDONE
    362	IEUD	RPL_CLOSING
    363	IEUD	RPL_CLOSEEND
    364	IEUD	RPL_LINKS
    365	IEUD	RPL_ENDOFLINKS
    366	IEUD	RPL_ENDOFNAMES
    367	IEUD	RPL_BANLIST
    368	IEUD	RPL_ENDOFBANLIST
    369	IEUD	RPL_ENDOFWHOWAS
    371	IEUD	RPL_INFO
    372	IEUD	RPL_MOTD
    373	IEUD	RPL_INFOSTART
    374	IEUD	RPL_ENDOFINFO
    375	IEUD	RPL_MOTDSTART
    376	IEUD	RPL_ENDOFMOTD
    381	IEUD	RPL_YOUREOPER
    382	IEUD	RPL_REHASHING
    383	ID	RPL_YOURESERVICE
    384	IEUD	RPL_MYPORTIS
    385	IEUD	RPL_NOTOPERANYMORE
    391	IEUD	RPL_TIME
    392	IED	RPL_USERSSTART
    393	IED	RPL_USERS
    394	IED	RPL_ENDOFUSERS
    395	IED	RPL_NOUSERS
    401	IEUD	ERR_NOSUCHNICK
    402	IEUD	ERR_NOSUCHSERVER
    403	IEUD	ERR_NOSUCHCHANNEL
    404	IEUD	ERR_CANNOTSENDTOCHAN
    405	IEUD	ERR_TOOMANYCHANNELS
    406	IEUD	ERR_WASNOSUCHNICK
    407	IEUD	ERR_TOOMANYTARGETS
    408	I	ERR_NOSUCHSERVICE
    408	D	ERR_NOCOLORSONCHAN
    409	IEUD	ERR_NOORIGIN
    411	IEUD	ERR_NORECIPIENT
    412	IEUD	ERR_NOTEXTTOSEND
    413	IEUD	ERR_NOTOPLEVEL
    414	IEUD	ERR_WILDTOPLEVEL
    415	I	ERR_BADMASK
    416	I	ERR_TOOMANYMATCHES
    416	U	ERR_QUERYTOOLONG
    421	IEUD	ERR_UNKNOWNCOMMAND
    422	IEUD	ERR_NOMOTD
    423	IEUD	ERR_NOADMININFO
    424	IED	ERR_FILEERROR
    429	D	ERR_TOOMANYAWAY
    431	IEUD	ERR_NONICKNAMEGIVEN
    432	IEUD	ERR_ERRONEUSNICKNAME
    433	IEUD	ERR_NICKNAMEINUSE
    434	ID	ERR_SERVICENAMEINUSE
    435	I	ERR_SERVICECONFUSED
    435	D	ERR_BANONCHAN
    436	IEUD	ERR_NICKCOLLISION
    437	IE	ERR_UNAVAILRESOURCE
    437	UD	ERR_BANNICKCHANGE
    438	I	ERR_DEAD
    438	U	ERR_NICKTOOFAST
    438	D	ERR_NCHANGETOOFAST
    439	UD	ERR_TARGETTOOFAST
    440	D	ERR_SERVICESDOWN
    441	IEUD	ERR_USERNOTINCHANNEL
    442	IEUD	ERR_NOTONCHANNEL
    443	IEUD	ERR_USERONCHANNEL
    444	IED	ERR_NOLOGIN
    445	IED	ERR_SUMMONDISABLED
    446	IED	ERR_USERSDISABLED
    451	IEUD	ERR_NOTREGISTERED
    452	i	ERR_IDCOLLISION
    453	i	ERR_NICKLOST
    455	D	ERR_HOSTILENAME
    461	IEUD	ERR_NEEDMOREPARAMS
    462	IEUD	ERR_ALREADYREGISTRED
    463	IEUD	ERR_NOPERMFORHOST
    464	IEUD	ERR_PASSWDMISMATCH
    465	IEUD	ERR_YOUREBANNEDCREEP
    466	IEUD	ERR_YOUWILLBEBANNED
    467	IEUD	ERR_KEYSET
    468	U	ERR_INVALIDUSERNAME
    468	D	ERR_ONLYSERVERSCANCHANGE
    471	IEUD	ERR_CHANNELISFULL
    472	IEUD	ERR_UNKNOWNMODE
    473	IEUD	ERR_INVITEONLYCHAN
    474	IEUD	ERR_BANNEDFROMCHAN
    475	IEUD	ERR_BADCHANNELKEY
    476	IEUD	ERR_BADCHANMASK
    477	E	ERR_MODELESS
    477	I	ERR_NOCHANMODES
    477	D	ERR_NEEDREGGEDNICK
    478	IEUD	ERR_BANLISTFULL
    479	ED	ERR_BADCHANNAME
    481	IEUD	ERR_NOPRIVILEGES
    482	IEUD	ERR_CHANOPRIVSNEEDED
    483	EUD	ERR_CANTKILLSERVER
    484	ED	ERR_DESYNC
    484	U	ERR_ISCHANSERVICE
    485	I	ERR_UNIQOPPRIVSNEEDED
    487	i	ERR_CHANTOORECENT
    488	i	ERR_TSLESSCHAN
    489	U	ERR_VOICENEEDED
    491	IEUD	ERR_NOOPERHOST
    492	I	ERR_NOSERVICEHOST
    501	IEUD	ERR_UMODEUNKNOWNFLAG
    502	IEUD	ERR_USERSDONTMATCH
    503	ED	ERR_GHOSTEDCLIENT
    504	ED	ERR_LAST_ERR_MSG
    511	UD	ERR_SILELISTFULL
    512	U	ERR_NOSUCHGLINE
    512	D	ERR_TOOMANYWATCH
    513	U	ERR_BADPING
    514	D	ERR_TOOMANYDCC
    521	D	ERR_LISTSYNTAX
    522	D	ERR_WHOSYNTAX
    523	D	ERR_WHOLIMEXCEED
    600	D	RPL_LOGON
    601	D	RPL_LOGOFF
    602	D	RPL_WATCHOFF
    603	D	RPL_WATCHSTAT
    604	D	RPL_NOWON
    605	D	RPL_NOWOFF
    606	D	RPL_WATCHLIST
    607	D	RPL_ENDOFWATCHLIST
    617	D	RPL_DCCSTATUS
    618	D	RPL_DCCLIST
    619	D	RPL_ENDOFDCCLIST
    620	D	RPL_DCCINFO
    999	D	ERR_NUMERIC_ERR


* * *
